Hello, everyone, and welcome back to the 10 days of JavaScript.
Here we are in day number five.
And in this lesson, we are going to learn how to make decisions in our code.
Let's jump right into an example.
So let's imagine that we own an online strawbery store and we have a rule that an order must contain
at least 10 strawberries in order for a user to place that order.
Otherwise, it's just not worth our while to ship it.
So if a visitor has added 10 or more strawberries to their cart, so let's say let Strawbery count equal
20, OK, as long as this variable that we just made up of Strawberry Count is greater than 10, then
maybe we want to output a message onto the Web page that says congratulations so we can use the Web
browsers document object.
And it contains a method named right.
So document right.
And we can include a string of text in these parentheses.
So I can just say congrats.
And then if I take a look at the preview area of code pen, there we can see.
Congrats.
OK, but on the other hand, if Strawbery Count is less than 10, we don't want to say congrats.
In that case, we would want to say document.
Right and say sorry.
We do not ship orders that small.
OK, now down in the preview area, obviously we do not want to show both of these messages.
We want to show either one or the other depending on the value of strawberry count.
So the question becomes, how can we make a decision in our code so that our application can handle
either situation and act accordingly?
Well, the answer is that we can use something called an if statement.
So check this out right above the congrats line.
Let's say if and then a space and then parentheses.
So if and then inside the parentheses, let's say Strawbery Count is greater than nine.
Right.
So that would include 10 and obviously any number greater than ten.
And then right after the closing parentheses, let's open up curly brackets inside the curly brackets.
I like to dropdown.
OK, now on this new line in between the curly brackets, let's cut and paste the congrats line.
So I'm just going to select this, cut it.
Paste it right here.
OK, now there's one more step I want to include before I take a break and explain how this code is
working.
So right after this closing curly bracket right here, let's say else, and then a new curly bracket
pair.
And in between these curly brackets, let's drop down and let's cut and paste our sorry message into
these curly brackets.
So I'm going to select this cut and paste it.
OK, so what's going on?
Let's review this code and detail.
It really almost makes sense in plain English.
We're saying if Strawberry Count is greater than nine, then do this or else or otherwise do this.
So now down in the preview area, we only see the congrats message because our strawberry count is clearly
greater than nine.
But if we change this value up here to something that is not greater than nine, like maybe five, for
example, then down in the previous area we see the sorry message and that's cool.
It means that our tiny application is now flexible.
It automatically adapts and makes decisions on its own.
And that's the heart and soul of programming.
Computer programming uses if statements or similar conditional logic like this everywhere, for example,
on Facebook, if you are someone's friend, then you can see their entire profile and all of their photos
else or otherwise.
If you are not their friend, maybe you just see a very limited version of their profile.
OK, now let's learn more about how if statements work.
So for starters, you do not need to include the else area.
The else is just a fallback insurance plan.
Right?
If this condition is not true, then the else will happen.
But you don't have to have the else.
So we could delete the word else and then it's curly bracket pair like this.
And now down in the previous area, we see that if this condition is not true, then just literally
nothing happens.
So the idea here is that the if statement can stand on its own without the else block.
OK, the next thing I want to cover is that this area inside the parentheses is called the condition.
A condition is going to boil down to a value of either true or false.
If it's true, then obviously the code inside the if curly brackets will run, if it's false, then
either nothing will happen or the code inside your else block will run.
Now for the condition we are not limited to only the greater than symbol or operator.
But before we move on to learn about other ways of comparing values, let's first analyze what's really
going on here.
So as you might have guessed, the greater than operator is going to compare the value to its left and
the value to its right and then return either a value of true or a value of false.
Now, this whole idea of a true or false value is a new concept to us.
So in previous lessons, we've learned that there are different types of values in JavaScript.
So down here, just as an example, I could say let test value equal.
And we've learned that one type of value is a number, right?
You don't need quotes around a number.
We learned that another type of value is a string of text.
Right?
You wrap it in quotes.
We learned that another type of value is an object with curly brackets.
Right.
So you say Species' Cath, we learned that another type of value is an array with square brackets separated
by commas like this.
So that's no strings of text objects, arrays, and now I want to introduce you to a new type of value
named a Bulleen.
A Boolean value is either set to literally the word true, and it's not wrapped in quotes.
If it was wrapped in quotes, that would just be a simple string of text.
But you can literally just say true or false.
OK, so the idea here is that up in our condition for the statement, the greater than operator is either
going to return true or false.
And that's a special type of value.
OK, and then the if statement knows what to do with that true or false value.
OK, so now that we have a general idea of what's going on, let's take a look at other ways of comparing
values aside from the greater than operator.
So obviously there is also the less than operator.
There is also the less than or equal to operator.
As you might have guessed, there's the greater than or equal to operator.
Or if you want to see if a value equals something in particular, you can say two equal signs.
And now this would only return true if our strawbery count was specifically set to nine.
The key here is that a single equal sign is how we can assign a value.
We are saying this should equal this, whereas double equals sign or two equal signs in a row like this
is how we check for equality.
OK, another comparison operator is if we say exclamation equal sign and this will return true if the
value is anything but the number nine.
So if I come up here and set the value to twenty, obviously that's not nine.
So down here we see the congrats message.
Also, it's important to know that we do not even need to use a comparison operator at all.
So, for example, our condition could literally just be the strawberry count variable, because in
this context, we're JavaScript is expecting a true or false value.
Any number larger than zero will be interpreted as true.
So right now we see that this is a valuating to true because we see the congrats message.
But up on this first line of code, if we changed our variable to equal zero.
We see that it evaluates to false, so within this context of everything getting interpreted as either
true or false, zero is false.
Any other number is true.
Obviously, if we spell out true, we see the congrats message or we could set this to false.
Also, a completely empty string of text will be interpreted as a false value, but a string of text
with any actual content in it is interpreted as true, OK, at this point in the lesson.
Let's change gears a bit.
And I want to stress the fact that this whole idea of true or false values is not limited to just an
if statement or in other words, the if statement is not the only place where a true or false value
is useful.
So right now, I want to show you a new example.
I'm going to completely erase everything we have here and start fresh for this next example.
Let's imagine that we want to output something onto the Web page many, many times, maybe one or two
hundred times.
So this is totally random.
But just type this out with me.
If we say document, right, and we say there are two strawberries, OK, and then let's just copy and
paste this line, copy and paste it and imagine that you wanted to count counts.
He'd say there are two strawberries.
There are three.
There are four.
There are five.
There are six.
And imagine you wanted to count like this all the way up to 500.
Well, copying and pasting would be incredibly repetitive and it's really just sloppy, lazy code.
But luckily computers are really good at repetitive tasks.
So right now I want to show you how we can make the computer do all of that hard work for us.
And the key here is leveraging a true or false value.
So check this out.
Let's begin with two forward slashes to begin a comment.
I will explain why we are including this comment in just a moment.
But right after that, let's say a while and then a pair of parentheses and then after that, a pair
of curly brackets.
Now, within the while parentheses, we include a condition, obviously, that will return true or false.
Now, as long as it evaluates to true, whatever lives within the curly brackets is going to happen
again.
And then it's going to check the true or false nature of our condition again and then repeat the curly
brackets again and again and again until finally the condition evaluates to false.
It's a bit hard to understand until you actually see it in action.
So let's try this out on a new line up at the very, very top.
Let's say let strawberry count equal to OK, now in the condition for our while loop within these parentheses,
let's say while Strawbery Count is less than two hundred, then within the curly brackets for the while
loop let's say document dot.
Right.
And let's say there are and then instead of hard coding a number ourselves right here, like three or
four or five, let's end the quotes and say plus strawberry count.
So pull in the variable and then let's finish out the sentence.
So there are blank strawberries, OK, now, right after this line, but still within the while loop
curly brackets, let's say strawberry count should equal strawberry count plus one.
I will explain this line of code in just a minute.
But for now, let's try removing the two forward slashes on this line of code to basically remove the
comment.
OK, down the previous area, you can see that the computer automatically counted all the way to one
hundred ninety nine.
If we wanted it to actually include two hundred, we could change this to less than or equal to.
OK, then down the preview, we see it counted all the way to two hundred.
So what's going on.
How is this working.
Basically a while loop is just going to keep repeating its body.
It's area within the curly brackets here until the condition is no longer true.
So we know that Strawberry Count starts out with a value of two and then each time the while loop runs,
remember, on this line of code we are basically incrementing strawberry count by one.
So we're saying that variable should equal itself plus one.
Now, a neat little trick.
There is a more succinct or cleaner way of writing the same line of code.
But before we improve or modify this line, I want to be sure to comment about the beginning of our
while loop once again.
So just to forward Slash is here and I'm only doing this because code pen automatically reruns and retests
your code after every keystroke.
And when you're working with a while loop, you want to be careful to not try and execute an infinite
loop.
Because if you think about it, without this line of code that I'm highlighting right now, if we never
incremented the value of Strawberry Count, then the while loop would just run forever because it would
never have a.
Value greater than 200 and computers don't like it when you create an infinite loop, they tend to freeze
up or lock up anyways.
Once you've commented at the beginning of the while loop, we can improve this line of code by simply
saying strawbery count plus.
Plus when we include two plus symbols at the end of a variable like this, it will increment or add
one to that value.
OK, now let's test this out.
Let's get rid of the comment or the two slashes in front of a while and we see that it works perfectly
still.
And just a small update.
Why don't we change it so that each sentence sits on its own line?
So after Strawberry's period, I'm just going to include a B-R tag.
Cool.
And there we see it.
The computer counts all the way up to 200 for us.
And computers are really good at repetitive tasks like this.
You could change this to 500 and it's going to count all the way up for you anyways.
The take away idea here is that there are many places in JavaScript where you can leverage a true or
false value to circle back to the idea of this lesson.
The while loop is going to keep repeating itself again and again and again as long as this value is
true or to put it into common English, it's basically saying, while this is true, do this.
Now, that's going to bring this lesson to a close.
But before we move on to the next lesson, I do want to let you know that I am fully aware that these
first four or five lessons have been a bit disjointed.
And I know it can be challenging to stay engaged because we haven't yet tried to test our knowledge
by building some sort of real world application.
Right.
The fun level has not been too high yet, but trust me, you are doing yourself a huge favor by learning
this core of the language first, once all of these different symbols in parentheses and equal signs,
once this basic syntax becomes even a little bit familiar to you, you will have already won 90 percent
of the battle of learning to be a JavaScript developer because JavaScript is JavaScript.
It doesn't matter if we are writing it in the Web browser or if we are writing it from node to set up
a server or we are writing it for Mongo DB to work with the database.
If you can speak this code, if you can speak this language itself, then learning the environmental
jargon of the browser or node or Mongo DB is a piece of cake.
Now again, I know the fun level in the course so far has been relatively low and I know that so many
other courses take the opposite approach they have.
You start building a web application immediately, but you're really just copying what the instructor
is typing because things are moving so fast and you haven't yet had a chance to get familiar with the
syntax.
Right.
The parentheses, the curly brackets, the dots, the equal signs, the quotes, so on and so forth.
So long story short, I know without a doubt that this is the most boring and tedious part of the entire
full stack course.
But consider this first chapter, the metaphorical act of eating your broccoli.
Right.
It's not the tastiest, but it's really good for you in the long run.
So for many of you, I know it feels like we're moving very slowly.
Don't worry.
The speed and tempo of this course is going to pick up dramatically as we move on.
But in this first introductory chapter, let's just keep eating our broccoli for a few more lessons.
Right.
We are already done with day five out of ten.
And once we finished the ten days of JavaScript, we will have a rock solid foundation and a basic understanding
of the language itself.
And then from there, we can get on to the fun stuff and actually start building applications.
Trust me, there is a method to this madness.
Now, in our very next lesson, we are going to learn more about functions as we answer the question
what is a higher order function?
Should be a lot of fun.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.